Extending AI Actions (#2537)
ibexa/documentation-developer: docs/ai_actions/extend_ai_actions.md

## Execute Actions
You can execute AI Actions by using the [ActionServiceInterface](../api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-ConnectorAi-ActionServiceInterface.html) service, as in the following example:

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/ai_actions/src/Command/AddMissingAltTextCommand.php', 101, 120) =]]
```

The `GenerateAltTextAction` is a built-in action implementing the [ActionInterface](../api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-ConnectorAi-ActionInterface.html), taking an [Image](../api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-ConnectorAi-Action-DataType-Image.html) as an input and generating the alternative text in the response.

This action is parameterized using the [RuntimeContext](../api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-ConnectorAi-Action-RuntimeContext.html) and the [ActionContext](../api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-ConnectorAi-Action-ActionContext.html), allowing you to pass additional options to the Action before it's executed.

| Type of context | Type of options | Usage | In the example |
|---|---|---|---|

> | Runtime Context | Runtime options | Set additional parameters that are relevant to the specific action that is currently executed | Information about the language of the content that is being processed. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Runtime Context | Runtime options | Sets additional parameters that are relevant to the specific action that is currently executed | Information about the language of the content that is being processed |
```

> | Action Context | Action Type options | Set additional parameters for the Action Type | Information about the expected response length. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Action Context | Action Type options | Sets additional parameters for the Action Type | Information about the expected response length |
```

> | Action Context | Action Handler options |Set additional parameters for the Action Handler | Information about the model, temperature, prompt, and max tokens allowed. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Action Context | Action Handler options |Sets additional parameters for the Action Handler | Information about the model, temperature, prompt, and max tokens allowed |
```

> | Action Context | System options | Set additional information, not matching the other option collections | Information about the fallback locale |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Action Context | System options | Sets additional information, not matching the other option collections | Information about the fallback locale |
```

Both `ActionContext` and `RuntimeContext` are passed to the Action Handler (an object implementing the [ActionHandlerInterface](../api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-ConnectorAi-Action-ActionHandlerInterface.html)) to execute the action. The Action Handler is responsible for combining all the options together, sending them to the AI service and returning an [ActionResponse](../api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-ConnectorAi-ActionResponseInterface.html).

> You can pass the Action Handler directly to the `ActionServiceInterface::execute()` method, overriding all the other ways of selecting the Action Handler.
> You can also specify the Action Handler by making it part of the passed [Action Configuration](#action-configurations).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can pass the Action Handler directly to the `ActionServiceInterface::execute()` method, which overrides all the other ways of selecting the Action Handler.
You can also specify the Action Handler by including it in the provided [Action Configuration](#action-configurations).
```

In other cases, the Action Handler is selected automatically. 

> You can influence this choice by creating your own class implementing the [ActionHandlerResolverInterface](../api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-ConnectorAi-Action-ActionHandlerResolverInterface.html) or by listening to the [ResolveActionHandlerEvent](../api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-ConnectorAi-Events-ResolveActionHandlerEvent.html) Event that the default implementation emits.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can affect this choice by creating your own class implementing the [ActionHandlerResolverInterface](../api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-ConnectorAi-Action-ActionHandlerResolverInterface.html) or by listening to the [ResolveActionHandlerEvent](../api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-ConnectorAi-Events-ResolveActionHandlerEvent.html) Event sent by the default implementation.
```

You can influence the execution of an Action with two events:

- [BeforeExecuteEvent](../api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-ConnectorAi-Action-Event-BeforeExecuteEvent.html), fired before the Action is executed
- [ExecuteEvent](../api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-ConnectorAi-Action-Event-ExecuteEvent.html), fired after the Action is executed

> Below you can find the full example of a Symfony Command, together with a matching service definition. The command finds the images modified in the last 24 hours, and adds the alternative text to them if it's missing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below you can find the full example of a Symfony Command, together with a matching service definition.
The command finds the images modified in the last 24 hours, and adds the alternative text to them if it's missing.
```

``` php hl_lines="87 100-125"
[[= include_file('code_samples/ai_actions/src/Command/AddMissingAltTextCommand.php') =]]
```

``` yaml
[[= include_file('code_samples/ai_actions/config/services.yaml', 25, 28) =]]
```

> Executing Actions this way has a major drawback: all the parameters are stored directly in the code and cannot be easily reused or changed. To manage configurations of an AI Action you need to use another concept: Action Configurations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Executing Actions this way has a major drawback: all the parameters are stored directly in the code and cannot be easily reused or changed.
To manage configurations of an AI Action you need to use another concept: Action Configurations.
```

## Action Configurations

### Manage Action Configurations

> Action Configurations allow you to store the parameters for a given Action in the database and reuse them when needed. They can be managed [through the back office]([[= user_doc =]]/ai_actions/work_with_ai_actions.md), through [data migrations](importing_data.md#ai-action-configurations), and through the PHP API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Action Configurations allow you to store the parameters for a given Action in the database and reuse them when needed.
They can be managed [through the back office]([[= user_doc =]]/ai_actions/work_with_ai_actions.md), [data migrations](importing_data.md#ai-action-configurations), or through the PHP API.
```

> To manage Action Configurations through the PHP API use the [ActionConfigurationServiceInterface](../api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-ConnectorAi-ActionConfigurationServiceInterface.html) service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To manage Action Configurations through the PHP API, you need to use the [ActionConfigurationServiceInterface](../api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-ConnectorAi-ActionConfigurationServiceInterface.html) service.
```

You can manage them using the following methods:

> - Create them with `ActionConfigurationServiceInterface::createActionConfiguration()`, passing the [ActionConfigurationCreateStruct](../api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-ConnectorAi-ActionConfiguration-ActionConfigurationCreateStruct.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Creating them with `ActionConfigurationServiceInterface::createActionConfiguration()`, that passes the [ActionConfigurationCreateStruct](../api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-ConnectorAi-ActionConfiguration-ActionConfigurationCreateStruct.html).
```

Author: It's the developer who should pass the `ActionConfigurationCreateStruct` argument to the `ActionConfigurationServiceInterface::createActionConfiguration()` method.
I will modify this one (and the following ones, that are similar) to:
```
Create them with `ActionConfigurationServiceInterface::createActionConfiguration()` by passing the [ActionConfigurationCreateStruct](../api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-ConnectorAi-ActionConfiguration-ActionConfigurationCreateStruct.html).
```

Action Type names can be localized using the Translation component. See the built-in Action Types like Generate Alt Text or Refine Text for an example.

### Create custom Data classes

The `TranscribeAudio` Action Type requires adding two data classes that exists in its definition:

- an `Audio` class, implementing the [DataType interface](../api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-ConnectorAi-DataType.html), to store the input data for the Action

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/ai_actions/src/AI/DataType/Audio.php') =]]
```

- an `TranscribeAudioAction` class, implementing the [ActionInterface interface](../api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-ConnectorAi-ActionInterface.html). Pass this object to the `ActionServiceInterface::execute()` method to execute the action.

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/ai_actions/src/AI/Action/TranscribeAudioAction.php') =]]
```

### Create custom Action Type options form

> Custom Form Type is needed if the Action Type requires additional options configurable in the UI. The following example adds a checkbox field that indicates to the Action Handler whether the transcription should include the timestamps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Custom Form Type is needed if the Action Type requires additional options configurable in the UI.
The following example adds a checkbox field that indicates to the Action Handler whether the transcription should include the timestamps.
```

``` php hl_lines="16-20"
[[= include_file('code_samples/ai_actions/src/Form/Type/TranscribeAudioOptionsType.php') =]]
```

``` yaml
[[= include_file('code_samples/ai_actions/config/services.yaml', 51, 58) =]]
```

The built-in `Ibexa\Bundle\ConnectorAi\Form\FormMapper\ActionConfiguration\ActionTypeOptionsFormMapper` renders the Form Type in the back office when editing the Action Configuration for a specific Action Type (indicated by the `type` attribute of the `ibexa.connector_ai.action_configuration.form_mapper.action_type_options` service tag).

### Create custom Action Handler

> An example Action Handler combines the input data and the Action Type options and passes them to the Whisper executable to form an Action Response. The language of the transcribed data is extracted from the Runtime Context for better results. The Action Type options provided in the Action Context dictate whether the timestamps will be removed before returning the result.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An example Action Handler combines the input data and the Action Type options and passes them to the Whisper executable to form an Action Response.
The language of the transcribed data is extracted from the Runtime Context for better results.
The Action Type options provided in the Action Context dictate whether the timestamps will be removed before returning the result.
```

``` php hl_lines="34-37 52-55"
[[= include_file('code_samples/ai_actions/src/AI/Handler/WhisperAudioToTextActionHandler.php') =]]
```

``` yaml
[[= include_file('code_samples/ai_actions/config/services.yaml', 59, 63) =]]
```

### Integrate with the REST API

> At this point the custom Action Type can already be executed by using the PHP API. To integrate it with the [AI Actions execute endpoint](../api/rest_api/rest_api_reference/rest_api_reference.html#ai-actions-execute-ai-action) you need to create additional classes responsible for parsing the request and response data. See [adding custom media type](adding_custom_media_type.md) and [creating new REST resource](creating_new_rest_resource.md) to learn more about extending the REST API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At this point the custom Action Type can already be executed by using the PHP API.
To integrate it with the [AI Actions execute endpoint](../api/rest_api/rest_api_reference/rest_api_reference.html#ai-actions-execute-ai-action) you need to create additional classes responsible for parsing the request and response data.
See [adding custom media type](adding_custom_media_type.md) and [creating new REST resource](creating_new_rest_resource.md) to learn more about extending the REST API.
```

> #### Handle input data
> Start by creating an Input Parser able to handle the `application/vnd.ibexa.api.ai.TranscribeAudio` media type.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Handle input data

Start by creating an Input Parser able to handle the `application/vnd.ibexa.api.ai.TranscribeAudio` media type.
```

> #### Handle input data
> Start by creating an Input Parser able to handle the `application/vnd.ibexa.api.ai.TranscribeAudio` media type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Handle input data

Start by creating an Input Parser able to handle the `application/vnd.ibexa.api.ai.TranscribeAudio` media type.
```

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/ai_actions/src/AI/REST/Input/Parser/TranscribeAudio.php') =]]
```

``` yaml
[[= include_file('code_samples/ai_actions/config/services.yaml', 68, 72) =]]
```

The `TranscribeAudioAction` is a value object holding the parsed request data.

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/ai_actions/src/AI/REST/Value/TranscribeAudioAction.php') =]]
```

> #### Handle output data
> To transform the `TranscribeAudioAction` into a REST response you need to create:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Handle output data

To transform the `TranscribeAudioAction` into a REST response you need to create:
```

- An `AudioText` value object holding the REST response data

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/ai_actions/src/AI/REST/Value/AudioText.php') =]]
```

> - A resolver converting the Action Response returned from the PHP API layer into the `AudioText` object. The resolver is activated when `application/vnd.ibexa.api.ai.AudioText` media type is specified in the `Accept` header:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A resolver converting the Action Response returned from the PHP API layer into the `AudioText` object.
The resolver is activated when `application/vnd.ibexa.api.ai.AudioText` media type is specified in the `Accept` header:
```

```

``` yaml
[[= include_file('code_samples/ai_actions/config/services.yaml', 73, 76) =]]
```

- A visitor converting the response value object into a serialized REST response:

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/ai_actions/src/AI/REST/Output/ValueObjectVisitor/AudioText.php') =]]
```

``` yaml
[[= include_file('code_samples/ai_actions/config/services.yaml', 77, 81) =]]
```

You can now execute a specific Action Configuration for the new custom Action Type through REST API by sending the following request:

``` http
POST /ai/action/execute/my_action_configuration HTTP/1.1
Accept: application/vnd.ibexa.api.ai.AudioText+json
Content-Type: application/vnd.ibexa.api.ai.TranscribeAudio+json
```

```json
{
    "TranscribeAudio": {
        "Audio": {
            "base64": "audioEncodedInBase64"
        },
        "RuntimeContext": {
            "languageCode": "eng-GB"
        }
    }
}
```

### Integrate into the back office

The last step in fully integrating the Transcribe Audio Action Type embeds it directly into the back office, allowing Editors to invoke it while doing their daily work.

> Extend the default editing template of the `ezbinaryfile` fieldtype by creating a new file called `templates/themes/admin/admin/ui/fieldtype/edit/form_fields_binary_ai.html.twig`. This template embeds the AI component, but only if a dedicated `transcript` field (of `eztext` type) is available in the same content type to store the content of the transcription.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Extend the default editing template of the `ezbinaryfile` fieldtype by creating a new file called `templates/themes/admin/admin/ui/fieldtype/edit/form_fields_binary_ai.html.twig`.
This template embeds the AI component, but only if a dedicated `transcript` field (of `eztext` type) is available in the same content type to store the content of the transcription.
```

``` twig
[[= include_file('code_samples/ai_actions/templates/themes/admin/admin/ui/fieldtype/edit/form_fields_binary_ai.html.twig') =]]
```

And add it to the SiteAccess configuration for the `admin_group`:
``` yaml
[[= include_file('code_samples/ai_actions/config/packages/ibexa_admin_ui.yaml', 4, 5) =]][[= include_file('code_samples/ai_actions/config/packages/ibexa_admin_ui.yaml', 13, 15) =]][[= include_file('code_samples/ai_actions/config/packages/ibexa_admin_ui.yaml', 84) =]]
```

The configuration of the AI component takes the following parameters:

- `module_id` - name of the JavaScript module to handle the invoked action. `ImgToText` is a built-in one handling alternative text use case, `TranscribeAudio` is a custom one.
- `ai_config_id` - identifier of the Action Type to load Action Configurations for. The [ibexa_ai_config Twig function](ai_actions_twig_functions.md#ibexa_ai_config) is used under the hood.
- `container_selector` - CSS selector to narrow down the HTML area which is affected by the AI component.

> - `input_selector` - CSS selector indicating the input field (must be the below the `container_selector` in the HTML structure).
> - `output_selector` - CSS selector indicating the output field (must be the below the `container_selector` in the HTML structure).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `input_selector` - CSS selector indicating the input field (must be below the `container_selector` in the HTML structure).
- `output_selector` - CSS selector indicating the output field (must be below the `container_selector` in the HTML structure).
```

- `cancel_wrapper_selector` - CSS selector indicating the element to which the "Cancel AI" UI element is attached.

Now create the JavaScript module mentioned in the template that is responsible for:

- gathering the input data (downloading the attached binary file and converting it into base64)
- executing the Action Configuration chosen by the editor through the REST API
- attaching the response to the output field

You can find the code of the module below. Place it in a file called `assets/js/transcribe.audio.js`

``` js
[[= include_file('code_samples/ai_actions/assets/js/transcribe.audio.js') =]]
```

The last step is adding the module to the list of AI modules in the system, by using the provided `addModule` function.

Create a file called `assets/js/addAudioModule.js`:

``` js
[[= include_file('code_samples/ai_actions/assets/js/addAudioModule.js') =]]
```

> And include it into the back office using Webpack Encore. See [configuring assets from main project files](importing_assets_from_bundle.md#configuration-from-main-project-files) to learn more about this mechanism.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And include it into the back office using Webpack Encore.
See [configuring assets from main project files](importing_assets_from_bundle.md#configuration-from-main-project-files) to learn more about this mechanism.
```

---
description: Extend AI Actions by connecting to other services and adding new capabilities.
month_change: true
---

# Extend AI Actions

> By extending AI Actions, you can make regular content management and editing tasks more appealing and less demanding.

Reviewer 2: Maybe a link back for readers directly arriving here from a search result.
```suggestion
By extending [AI Actions](ai_actions_guide.md), you can make regular content management and editing tasks more appealing and less demanding.
```

See the [AI Actions event reference](ai_action_events.md#action-configurations-management) for a list of events related to these operations.

You can get a specific Action Configuration using the `ActionConfigurationServiceInterface::getActionConfiguration()` method and search for them using the `ActionConfigurationServiceInterface::findActionConfigurations()` method.
See [Action Configuration Search Criteria reference](action_configuration_criteria.md) and [Action Configuration Search Sort Clauses reference](action_configuration_sort_clauses.md) to discover query possibilities.

The following example creates a new Action Configuration:

``` php hl_lines="3 17"
[[= include_file('code_samples/ai_actions/src/Command/ActionConfigurationCreateCommand.php', 59, 76) =]]
```

Actions Configurations are tied to a specific Action Type and are translatable.

### Execute Actions with Action Configurations

Reuse existing Action Configurations to simplify the execution of AI Actions.
You can pass one directly to the `ActionServiceInterface::execute()` method:

``` php hl_lines="7-8"

> [[= include_file('code_samples/ai_actions/src/Command/ActionConfigurationCreateCommand.php', 77, 85) =]]

Reviewer 2: I would have prefer a rewrite of the previous example.

```suggestion
        $action = new GenerateAltTextAction(new Image([$imageEncodedInBase64]));

        $actionConfiguration = $this->actionConfigurationService->getActionConfiguration('TODO_alt_text');

        $output = $this->actionService->execute($action, $actionConfiguration)->getOutput();
```

But no big deal, reader should connect the dot and see how this could have been used in the previous example.

The built-in Action Types use service tags to find Action Handlers capable of handling them and display in the back office UI:

- Refine Text uses the `ibexa.ai.action.handler.text_to_text` service tag
- Generate Alt Text uses the `ibexa.ai.action.handler.image_to_text` service tag

### Provide Form configuration

Form configuration makes the Handler configurable by using the back office.
The example handler uses the `system_prompt` option, which becomes part of the Action Configuration UI thanks to the following code:

``` php hl_lines="16-20"
[[= include_file('code_samples/ai_actions/src/Form/Type/TextToTextOptionsType.php') =]]
```

``` yaml
[[= include_file('code_samples/ai_actions/config/services.yaml', 34, 41) =]]
```

The created Form Type adds the `system_prompt` field to the Form.
Use the `Ibexa\Bundle\ConnectorAi\Form\FormMapper\ActionConfiguration\ActionHandlerOptionsFormMapper` class together with the `ibexa.connector_ai.action_configuration.form_mapper.options` service tag to make it part of the Action Handler options form.
Pass the Action Handler identifier (`LLaVATextToText`) as the type when tagging the service.

> The Action Handler and Action Type options are rendered in the back office using the built-in Twig option formatter.

Reviewer 2: Maybe a screenshot of the default rendering of this example form.
